Max-Planck-Institut für                         Technische Universität München
Extraterrestrische Physik                                   Fakultät für Physik




                            Bachelor Thesis



  Light Simulation in a CeBr3 Scintillator
       Simulation der Lichtausbreitung in einem CeBr3 Szintillator

                            Anna Ovsiannikova

                            23. Dezember 2020
Erstgutachter (Themensteller): PD Dr. Jochen Greiner
Zweitgutachter: Prof. Dr. Lothar Oberauer
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                        6
  1.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
  1.2 Gamma spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7
  1.3 Scintillator detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
  1.4 Interaction of particles with matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
       1.4.1 Interaction of gamma photons with matter . . . . . . . . . .            11
       1.4.2 Interaction of charged particles with matter . . . . . . . . . .        15
       1.4.3 Optical photons interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
  1.5 Gamma photons detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18
  1.6 Gamma and optical photons simulation in GEANT4 . . . . . . . . .               19

2 Simulation                                                                         21
  2.1 Simulation setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21
  2.2 Verification of the material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23
      2.2.1 Scintillation spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23
      2.2.2 Gamma photons interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           24
      2.2.3 Light yield distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25
      2.2.4 Optical photons bulk absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          27
      2.2.5 Reflection at different surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27

3 Results                                                                            31
  3.1 Detection efficiency and photopeak efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31
      3.1.1 Detection efficiency of bare CeBr3 crystal . . . . . . . . . . .         31
      3.1.2 Effect of the encapsulation of the crystal and the direction of
             the incoming gamma photons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          33
  3.2 Light distribution at the bottom of the scintillator . . . . . . . . . .       34
      3.2.1 Light distribution at the bottom of the bare crystal . . . . .           34
      3.2.2 Effect of the the direction of the incoming gamma photons .              36
      3.2.3 Effect of the reflector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    37

4 Conclusions and perspectives                                                       40

Appendices                                                                           42

References                                                                           57



                                                                                      3
Abstract
The POLAR-2 instrument is going to perform detailed measurements of polarization
degree and angle of the prompt emission of Gamma Ray Bursts. A spectrometer
as a part of the instrument should provide spectral and location measurements
for all GRBs observed by POLAR-2. Due to its excellent properties such as high
light yield, short decay time, good energy resolution and low intrinsic activity the
inorganic CeBr3 scintillator is considered to be very promising in achieving this goal.
In order to investigate its properties a GEANT4 simulation of CeBr3 scintillator of
various shapes and sizes with different models of reflecting at the crystal surfaces
was developed. Both absorption and photo-peak efficiency of a CeBr3 crystal as well
as the light propagation in it were studied. The influence of the reflecting model
choice on the light output was shown.




4
Danksagung
Ich möchte mich gern bei Dr Jochen Greiner für die Möglichkeit meine Bachelor-
arbeit am MPE durchzuführen sowie für deren Betreuung und Begutachtung als
auch für die hilfreichen Hinweise bedanken. Für die Unterstützung bei der Fragen
bezüglich GEANT4 bedanke ich mich bei Merlin Kole. Außerdem bedanke ich mich
bei Dr. Lothar Oberauer, der die Zweitbegutachtung vornimmt.




                                                                              5
Chapter 1
Introduction
The first chapter gives a briefly introduction into aims of the gamma spectroscopy,
GEANT4 and those particle interaction with matter, that are relevant to the per-
formed simulation. The second chapter describes the simulation setup and the veri-
fication of the material property of the CeBr3 . The third part deals with the results
of the simulations. The last chapter sums the thesis up.


1.1 Motivation
The Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) are very bright bursts of γ rays that can last from
milliseconds to hours. Those of them that last below 2 seconds are called short
bursts and originate from the merger of two neutrons stars. The long bursts last
longer than 2 seconds and are supposed to be the result of the collapse of massive
stars. The prompt emission of GRB is followed by the afterglow of lower energy in
optical and radio bands.
   There are some models describing the mechanism of particle acceleration that
leads to the observed prompt emission. Each of them has diverse prediction about
the polarization degree and angle of GRB [16]. If the prompt emission is the result of
synchrotron radiation, the polarization degree is predicted to be 50%. The polariza-
tion degree in models describing the prompt emission as a result of inverse-Compton
scattering correlates strongly with the angle between the jet and an observer: in a
case of a large angle high polarization angle is predicted. Otherwise unpolarized
GRBs are forecasted. The measurements of the polarization degree and angle of the
prompt emission of Gamma-Ray Bursts should provide essential data to constrain
the theoretical models.
   The POLAR instrument, which worked on board the Chinese space laboratory
Tiangong-2 from September 2016 till April 2017, has reported polarization meas-
urements of 14 observed GRBs [15]. The analysis of those measurements has shown
that the larger sample is required. POLAR-2, which is going to be launched in 2024
and placed on the China Space Station, should provide those measurements due to
an increase in the effective area of one order of magnitude compared that of POLAR
[16].



6
                                                            1.2 Gamma spectroscopy


   To inquire the detailed spectral and location measurements for all observed GRBs
and do not rely on those measurements from the other detectors POLAR2 is going
to be supplied with a spectrometer in addition to the polarimeter. The spectrometer
should allow to localize a short GRB as faint as GRB 170817A to better than 2◦
radius (2σ) and the peak energy for such GRBs should be measured to better than
30% up to 2 MeV [2]. To achieve this goal several modules of CeBr3 scintillators are
going to be used, as a CeBr3 crystal is supposed to meet the necessary performance
criteria due to its excellent properties.
   As a variety of factors affects the response of the detector the detailed simulation
of optical physics processes is required.


1.2 Gamma spectroscopy
GRBs are not the only subject of Gamma spectroscopy [3], [7]. The compact objects
like neutron stars and black holes as well as more extended regions such as supernova
remnants or the inner galaxies emit gamma radiation. Gamma photons travel in
straight lines, that allows the accurate determination of their origin. Gamma rays
also trace very energetic processes of supernova explosions.
   A white dwarf can becomes supernova during the nuclear fusion of carbon and
oxygen and Si burning (type Ia). A massive star results in a supernova after it
develops iron core of such a size, that the core can not be sustained any more
and a gravitational collapse occurs. While the supernova explosions the 56 Ni is
produced, that decays later into 56 Co and 56 Fe with gamma ray emission. As it starts
expanding a supernova is dense enough to absorb all gamma rays from 56 Ni, but with
the time more and more of the gamma photons escape and can be observed. The
evolution of gamma spectrum thus gives information about the supernova dynamics
and nucleosynthesis. Significant spectral lines in case of core collapse supernova can
be obtained from decay of 44 Ti, which is related to the supernova remnant, and
longer lived 26 Al and 60 Fe.
   The other objective of the gamma spectrometry is the determination of the ele-
mental composition of the surface of the planets in the Solar system, e. g. Mercury
(BepiColombo mission), Mars (Mars Odyssey mission) and Moon (Lunar Prospector
and LRO).
   Due to lack of the atmosphere the galactic cosmic rays (GCR) can freely reach the
surface of the planet and interact with the matter of planetary surfaces [19], [29],
producing large amount of spallation neutrons.
   Those neutrons undergo the inelastic scattering and radiative capture, emitting
the characteristic gamma rays. As every chemical element has its own set of gamma
ray lines it is possible to identify uniquely the presence and the abundance of the
certain element in the sample.



                                                                                     7
Chapter 1 Introduction


   As the intensity of the spectral lines depends not only on the abundance of the
elements but also on the spectral distribution of the neutron flux the knowledge of
the neutron albedo is crucial. That is why the neutron spectrometer complements
such gamma spectrometers.


1.3 Scintillator detectors
A scintillator crystal converts the deposited energy of an incoming particle into
luminescence light, which can be detected by a photodetector [23], [25], [14]. The
crystal with a photomultiplier tube makes up a scintillator detector.
   There are two groups of scintillators: organic and inorganic scintillators. The
organic scintillators have relatively low density, they can not stop the high energy
particles and only measure a small fraction of energy of the particle. Nevertheless
organic scintillators have excellent timing properties as well as low price and can
be produced in almost every geometry. The mechanism of light emission in organic
scintillators is a molecular effect.
   The inorganic scintillators are used as calorimeters that can measure the total
deposited energy, completely absorbing the particle. They have high atomic number
and high density. The luminescent properties of such scintillators are based on the
energy bands created in a crystal lattice, due to the interaction of the energy levels
of individual atoms.
   Gamma photons absorbed by the scintillation material (see 1.4.1) produce primary
electrons and positrons, those then lose their kinetic energy by collisions leaving the
ionization track of the secondary electron-hole pairs. The secondary electrons are
excited from the valence band, where they are bound at the lattice sites, to the
conduction band (fig. 1.1) with the band-gap energy Eg . If the energy is insufficient
the excitons are formed on an exciton band below the conduction one.
   The electrons in the conduction band can move throughout the crystal and ionize
it, creating new electrons. As soon as all these electrons are thermalized, they can
recombine over the gap, emitting the optical (UV) photon. The de-excitation of the
scintillator gives off light with the yield proportional to the deposited energy.
   Non radiative recombination as well as self-absorption quenches the light output.
Special impurities in the lattice located at the luminescence centers increase the
probability of radiative recombination by creating an additional energy level inside
the gap.
   The energy efficiency  of the scintillator is the product of the efficiency of conver-
sion of the incoming particle energy into the electron-hole pairs (1/k), the efficiency
of the energy transportation to the luminescent centers S and that of light generating
Q:
                                        hνSQ
                                    =          = hνL,                               (1.1)
                                         kEg


8
                                                                           1.3 Scintillator detectors




Figure 1.1: The band structure with the band gap energy Eg : a valence electron moves from the valence
band to the conduction band. An electronic level inside of the forbidden gap originates from the impurities
called activators (from [25]).



   where L is the light yield.
   For ionic crystals the maximum value of light yield attains about 660/Eg .
   The main characteristics of scintillators are energy resolution, detection efficiency,
full energy peak efficiency, decay time of the light puls and non-proportionality.
   A scintillator’s energy resolution R (eq. 1.2) is the ratio of the full width at half-
maximum (FWHM) of the peak of the spectrum to the magnitude of the peak E
[14] and is the property of the material.

                                        F W HM
                                            R=                               (1.2)
                                           E
  Detection efficiency DE [10] is the ratio of the amount of events measured in a
known interval D to that, emitted by the radiation source N (eq. 1.3). Materials
with high atomic number and high density possess better detection efficiency than
those with low atomic number and low density.

                                              D
                                               DE =                               (1.3)
                                              N
   Full energy peak detection efficiency or photo-peak efficiency is the ratio of the
events in the photopeak only to all counted events.
   Scintillation decay time is the time required for scintillation emission to decrease
to 1/e of its maximum and is different for fast and slow component.
   Non-proportionality is an intrinsic property of the scintillator and means a devi-
ation from a linear response. The number of electron–hole pairs created per unit
deposited energy is a function of energy and decreases with increasing ionization:
e.g. light yield of NaI:Tl at 15keV is about 20% larger than that at 480keV [14].
   NaI:Tl was the first discovered solid scintillator. It was historically employed in
the gamma spectroscopy as well as CsI and is still the most common scintillator



                                                                                                         9
Chapter 1 Introduction




Figure 1.2: The intrinsic activity of NaI, LaBr3 and CeBr3 crystals (from [21]). The CeBr3 activity is
significantly below that of both others crystals.



crystal used. It has low cost, energy resolution of about 6% [14], high brightness
and can be grown to the large sizes. Still those scintillators have moderate time and
energy resolution [3].
   CdWO4 and BGO, which are also used in gamma-ray spectroscopy, have the
advantage of extremely low background radioactivity but at the same time rather
large decay constant.
   Solid-state detectors such as Ge and CZT (Cadmium zinc telluride) obtain high
resolution, but large enough detectors are very expensive. Besides the Ge detectors
have to be cooled with liquid nitrogen to operate.
   Recently developed scintillation materials CeBr3 and LaBr3 promise increasing
detection performance especially in low energy band. Both of them are more dense
than NaI, have noticeably higher light yield and better energy resolution as well as
short decay time (17 ns for CeBr3 and 15 ns for LaBr3 ) [1].
   However due to the presence of a radioactive isotop 138 La LaBr3 has significant
intrinsic activity, spoiling the detection of gamma photons with energies below 1.5
MeV. CeBr3 also obtains intrinsic activity, occurring due to 227 Ac contamination,
as neither Ce nor Br have naturally radioactive isotope. But this activity is an
order of magnitude less than that of LaBr3 (fig. 1.2). The detailed study of the
characteristics of CeBr3 spectrometer is given in [1].
   In [9] CeBr3 is considered to be used in future ESA planetary mission. Here
among others the light yield as a function of temperature and gamma irradiation
were studied. One more advantage of CeBr3 is its high gamma radiation hardness.
   All these properties make CeBr3 very promising for applications in gamma spec-
troscopy.




10
                                                          1.4 Interaction of particles with matter


1.4 Interaction of particles with matter
This section describes relevant interactions of gamma photons with energy from
several tenth of keV to several MeV, electrons and positrons as secondary charged
particles as well as optical photons produced as a result of scintillation. The section
is based on [17], [18] and [20].

1.4.1 Interaction of gamma photons with matter
An incoming beam of photons passing through the matter undergoes the exponential
reduction of the intensity due to scattering or absorption of single photons.

                                               I = I0 e−(µx)                                             (1.4)

   Linear attenuation coefficient µ in equation 1.4 gives a probability for a photon
to be absorbed or scattered per unit distance traveled.
   Photons can be absorbed by matter in a single or several sequential interactions.
Each interaction changes the energy of incoming photons and can cause the emission
of the atomic electrons.
   The main photon interaction processes contributing to the total cross section are
photoelectric effect, Compton scattering and pair production in Coulomb field (Fig.
1.3 left).




Figure 1.3: Left: Total cross section for gamma photons in CeBr3 at 0.001 - 5 MeV in cm2 /g. At low energies
the total cross section that coincides here with that of photoelectric effect shows characteristic absorption
edges. Those are K- and L-edges for each Ce and Br. L-edges form 3 slightly different absorption edges due
to fine structure splitting (plotted from [30]). Right: Total to K-shell photoelectric cross section ratio [17].




                                                                                                            11
Chapter 1 Introduction


1.4.1.1 The photoelectric effect
The photoelectric effect, that dominates at low energies, results in a complete ab-
sorption of primary photon energy Eγ by atomic electron cloud. If the gain of the
energy by absorption of the photon exceeds the binding energy Ebind of an atomic
electron, it can be emitted with the kinetic energy Ee :

                                         Ee = Eγ − Ebind ,                                      (1.5)
   The atom as a whole recoils so that the energy and momentum are conserved. By
reason of conservation laws the absorption probability of this process increases with
the growth of the binding energy of electrons. As the electron binding energy on
the inner electron shell is much larger than that on the outer shell, the cross section
of the photoelectric effect is the highest for the K-shell. That is why by the most
absorption a K-shell electron will be emitted, if the incoming photon has sufficient
energy.
   The ratio of the total photoelectric cross section to the that of K-shell for different
atomic numbers Z is almost independent of the energy of the photon and can be
calculated by the formula 1.6. It increases with Z, but does not exceed 1.25 for large
Z (Fig. 1.3, right).
                    τph
                        ≈ 1 + 0.01481 · ln2 · Z − 0.000788 · ln3 · Z,             (1.6)
                    τk
   If the photon energy larger than the binding energy of one of the shells the cross
section decreases with the growth of the photon energy until it reaches the next shell
level. At this point the cross section increases abruptly, the absorption curve shows
characteristic absorption edges (K-edge and L-edge in Fig. 1.3 left).
   The total photoelectric cross section is generally direct proportional to Z 5 . For
non-relativistic energy region (hν < me c2 ) it can be described by Born approxima-
tion, whereas by energies near to the absorption edges the usage of the exact wave
functions is required.

         Table 1.1: The binding energy of the K- and L-shells for Ce and Br atoms (from [5]).


                      Element       Z       K         L1        L2        L3
                         Br         35    13.481     1.787     1.605     1.556
                         Ce         58    40.446     6.552     6.167     5.726




12
                                                            1.4 Interaction of particles with matter




Figure 1.4: Left: Compton scattering [17]: an incoming photon with a wavelength λ hits an electron at rest,
                                                     0
resulting in a scattered photon with a wavelength λ ≥ λ and an electron ejected at the angle θe . Right:
The energy distribution of a 500keV photon scattered at the different angles (red line) and that of an emitted
electron also depending on the ejection angle (blue line) [27].



1.4.1.2 Auger effect
When as a result of the photoelectric effect an electron is ejected from the atomic
shell (e.g. K), the atom is left in an exited state with a vacancy in this shell. An
electron from the higher shell (e.g. L-shell) makes a transition to a vacant shell,
releasing the energy E = Ebind (K) - Ebind (L). To reach the more stable state the
atom can radiate a single X-ray photon (characteristic X-ray) or emit one or more
electrons (Auger electrons) from higher shells. The ratio of the probabilities of both
deexitation transitions is given by a empirical formula 1.7 [17]. For materials with
Z > 30 the probability of the radiative transition exceeds that for non-radiative
transition (emission of Auger electrons).

                        Nk
                             = (−6.4 + 3.4 · Z − 0.000103 · Z 3 )4 × 10−8                              (1.7)
                      1 − Nk

1.4.1.3 Compton scattering
Compton or incoherent scattering on quasi-free individual electrons is the most relev-
ant gamma photon interaction at medium energies from some 100 keV up to several
MeV. An incoming photon interacts with an electron at the rest (Fig. 1.4) trans-
ferring some energy which leads to the increase in photon’s wavelength (Compton
shift). The electron recoils with a momentum p and kinetic energy Ee at an angle
                                                                 0
θe , while a photon scatters at an angle θν with a momentum hν /c.
   From the momentum and energy conservation one can obtain for electron mo-
mentum and kinetic energy respectively:
                                                        0          0
                                  p2e c2 = h2 (ν 2 + ν 2 − 2νν cosθν )                                 (1.8)

                                                               0
                                             Ee = h(ν − ν )                                            (1.9)



                                                                                                          13
Chapter 1 Introduction


  The Compton wavelength shift ∆λ for scattered photon can be calculated from:
                                   0
                           ∆λ = λ − λ = λe (1 − cosθν )                        (1.10)

where λe = mhe c is the Compton wavelength of the electron.
  The Compton shift depends on the scattering angle and attains its maximum
∆λ = 2λe for back-scattered photons.
  The angles θe and θν are related by the following equation:
                                             1              θν
                              tan θe =                cot                      (1.11)
                                         1 + mhν
                                               ec
                                                  2         2

  The mono-energetic beam of photons undergoing the Compton scattering pro-
duces scattered photons with a continuous energy distribution in the interval from
hν(1 + m2hν   −1 for back-scattered photons to hν (if θ = 0) as well as ejected elec-
            2)                                         ν
         ec
trons with a continuum spectrum of kinetic energy (Compton continuum) from 0
(θν = 0) to Eemax 1.12 known as Compton edge.

                                           me c2 −1
                             Eemax = hν(1 +      )                         (1.12)
                                            2hν
   The cross section of the Compton scattering is directly proportional to Z and
to the energy of the incoming photons and for low energy photons approaches the
classical Thomson cross section.

1.4.1.4 Pair production in the field of the nucleus
High energetic photons lose their energy by e+ e− pair production. The pair pro-
duction is possible if the energy of the incoming photon exceeds the threshold (eq.
1.13), which for a massive nucleus (M) is almost equal to 2me , where me c2 = 0.511
MeV is the rest mass of an electron. To preserve the momentum conservation the
nucleus has to take away an excessive momentum.
                                                      me
                               Eν ≥ 2me c2 (1 +          )                     (1.13)
                                                      M
  The kinetic energy of a produced electron as well as that of the positron has a
continuous distribution in the interval between 0 and Eν − 2me c2 .
  For not very energetic gamma photons the screening the nucleus electric field
by the outer electrons can be neglected and the cross section of pair production is
directly proportional to Z 2 and to the ln(Eν ) of the incoming photon.




14
                                              1.4 Interaction of particles with matter


1.4.1.5 Electromagnetic cascade
When high energetic photons hit the thick and dense matter they can produce
electrons and positrons still energetic enough to radiate another photons that in turn
undergo the Compton scattering or photoelectric effect, producing new electrons.
This phenomenon is called an electromagnetic cascade.
   At each step of the cascade more and more secondary particles with the decreasing
average energy are produced. At some depth called the shower maximum the number
of created secondary particles as well as the amount of dissipated energy reaches its
maximum. After this depth the cascade decays slowly. The energy absorption of
low energy electrons proceeds mainly via collision losses (see 1.4.2) at the constant
rate per unit length.
   Due to broad angular distribution of particles in Compton scattering and photo-
electric effect the cascade spreads in the direction orthogonal to that of the primary
particle.

1.4.2 Interaction of charged particles with matter
Charged particles interact with the electrons and nuclei electromagnetically, con-
tinuously losing the energy and exciting or ionizing the atoms. The energy loss in
such a process per unit path traveled is described by Bethe-Bloch equation:

                                     dE   4πnZ 2 e4
                                 −      =           L,                           (1.14)
                                     dx    me v 2
where L is the stopping number.
  When a charged particle collides an electron at rest, an energy transfer occurs
with the maximum at:

                                   E = me c2 (1 − γ)                             (1.15)
   The recoiled electron that has enough energy and can also excite and ionize atoms
is called δ electron.
   The process at which the charged particles of low energy has the most energy loss
is ionization. At the higher energies becomes the Bremsstrahlung more important
interaction.
   Bremsstrahlung is a radiative energy loss, that occurs if the electrons are deflected
while interacting with the Coulomb field of the nucleus. As a result the photons at
a small angle with respect to the electron direction are emitted.
   For electrons Bremsstrahlung starts to dominate at the energy of tens MeV and
for given conditions of the simulation the Bremsstrahlung is not an important energy
loss process.




                                                                                     15
Chapter 1 Introduction


  Low energetic positrons that can not produce heavy particles undergo mostly
two photons annihilation. After losing all their energy via ionization positrons stop
and annihilate with electrons producing gamma photons of the same energy. If a
positron still moves the angular and energy distribution of both photons depends
on the velocity of the positron.

1.4.3 Optical photons interactions
The photons in soft UV and optical range (with the energy of 1.5-4.0 eV or the
wavelength of 300 - 800 nm) created as a result of scintillation undergo also another
interactions in matter as well as at the surface of different materials. In this case
they are described as electromagnetic waves.
   The phase velocity of light in medium vph is lower than that in vacuum. The ratio
of both velocities gives the refractive index of the material (eq. 1.16).
                                               c
                                   n(ν) =                                      (1.16)
                                            vph (ν)
In materials with extinction, the waves are damped. Their intensity decreases ex-
ponentially with the Lambert-Beer’s law (eq. 1.17).

                                    I = I0 e−Kx ,                              (1.17)

where x is the thickness of the layer and K is the extinction constant. The extinction
length or reciprocal of extinction constant gives the path along that the intensity of
the light beam decreased to 1/e of its initial value.
  For such a material one can write a refractive index as a complex number:

                                n(ν) = nr (ν) − iκ(ν)                          (1.18)

   with the imaginary part of it being responsible for the extinction of the waves
caused by absorption and scattering. The imaginary part of the refractive index is
related with the extinction constant via the equation 1.19.
                                            4πκ
                                     K=         ,                              (1.19)
                                             λ
where λ is the wavelength in vacuum.
   The behavior of the wave at the boundary of two materials depends on the prop-
erties of the materials. If the materials on both sides of the surface have different
refractive indices the light beam splits into two partial beams (fig. 1.5): reflected,
which obeys the law of reflection (eq. 1.21), and refracted one, that follows the
Snell’s law:

                                       α = α‘ ,                                (1.20)



16
                                                          1.4 Interaction of particles with matter




Figure 1.5: Reflection and refraction at the surface of two media. The incident beam I splits into the reflected
(II) one and the refracted (III) one (from [18]).



where α is the angle of incidence.
                                               sinα    nin
                                                    =                                                   (1.21)
                                               sinβ   nref r

                                                           nin
                                              sinαT =                                                   (1.22)
                                                          nref r
   The fraction of the wave intensity reflected at the surface or transmitted through it
can be found from the Fresnel equations 1.23. These equations show the reflectivity
of the electromagnetic waves polarized parallel E||ref l and perpendicular E⊥ref l to
the surface [12], [18].


                                                      |E||ref l |2
                                              R|| =
                                                       |E||in |2
                                                                                                        (1.23)
                                                  |E⊥ref l |2
                                             R⊥ =
                                                   |E⊥in |2

where:
                          E||ref l   nref r cosα − nin cosβ   tan(β − α)
                                   =                        =
                           E||in     nref r cosα + nin cosβ   tan(β + α)
                                                                                                        (1.24)
                          E⊥ref l    nin cosα − nref r cosβ   sin(β − α)
                                   =                        =
                          E⊥in       nin cosα + nref r cosβ   sin(β + α)

Although the both R|| and R⊥ change differently with the incident angle, if nref r <
nin they both are equal to 1 for an angle αT (see eq.1.22), which is called the critical
angle of total reflection. In this case all incoming waves are reflected.



                                                                                                            17
Chapter 1 Introduction


1.5 Gamma photons detection
The probabilistic character of the gamma photons interaction with the matter leads
to the fact that not all of them are detected: most energetic particle can just go
through detector without any interaction and even if a gamma photon interacts
inside of a detector not all it energy will be absorbed and thus detected.
   A monoenergetic source of gamma photons can produce a energy spectrum dis-
tributed from 0 to the energy of the particle (fig. 1.6). If a gamma photon undergoes
photoelectric effect it is completely absorbed by the scintillator material and results
in full energy peak or photo-peak. The response of the detector by repeated depos-
ition of the same energy Eγ is not exactly the same, but is distributed about a mean
value.
   Gamma photons with initial energy Eγ undergoing Compton scattering can de-
posit up to Emax (eq. 1.12) in one interaction. The scattered photon still can be
completely absorbed in a subsequent photoelectric effect which results in photopeak
[14]. If the scattered photon escapes the detector the deposited energy is distrib-
uted in Compton continuum that ends with Compton edge, which corresponds to the
maximum energy transfer in Compton scattering. It is also possible that a photon
moved through the scintillator without interaction, undergoes Compton scattering
in a shielding. If the photon back-scattered in the crystal and is then absorbed
there, it can deposit the energy up to Eγ − Emax . This leads to one more peak (not
shown) called backscatter peak.
   In a pair production interaction a gamma photon is also completely absorbed as by
photoeffect, but one or both 0.511 MeV photons produced by positron annihilation
still can escape the detector. That is how the single and double escaped peak are
obtained.




  Figure 1.6: The detected spectrum of a beam of gamma photons with energy Eγ (adapted from [20]).




18
                           1.6 Gamma and optical photons simulation in GEANT4


1.6 Gamma and optical photons simulation in GEANT4
GEANT4 is a Monte Carlo simulation tool for modeling the interaction of the
particles with matter. It allows creation of different geometrical setups, choice of
different particles types and physics processes to be considered.
   Each primary particle with specified properties is created at the selected position.
As the particle moves through the volume it is tracked in time and space until it
stops, decays or leaves the simulated volume. The simulation of particle transport is
performed step by step [12]. All interactions depends on both material and particles
properties. GEANT4 allows the usage of the predefined materials from National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as well as those created by the users.
In the last case the exact chemical composition and density as well as a range of
other parameters are to define.
   Electromagnetic interactions are described in GEANT4 by different physics model
dependent on the energy range. The low energy (down to 10 eV) Livermore Model
includes photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, Rayleigh scattering, gamma con-
version (pair production), Bremsstrahlung and ionization. The low energy processes
make direct use of the atomic shell cross section data. Additional sub-package
implements the atomic de-excitation module like Auger electron emission and fluor-
escence.
   The optical processes in GEANT4 deal with the special particle - optical photon
that is different from the gamma photon. Optical photons are created as as result
of scintillation, Cherenkov radiation and Wave Length Shifting (WLS). A linear
polarization is automatically assigned to each photon at the generation process.
Optical processes are determined by the optical properties of the medium. In order
to simulate the optical processes those properties should be assigned to the materials
and the surfaces (at least the refractive index).
   In GEANT4 simulation an optical photon can undergo Rayleigh scattering, ab-
sorption and boundary interactions [12]. Bulk absorption just kills the particle.
The average distance traveled by a photon before being absorbed called absorption
length and is a material property dependent on the energy of the optical photon.
The differential cross section of Rayleigh scattering is proportional to 1 + cos(2θ),
where θ is the scattering angle.
   At the surface between two materials an optical photon can be reflected, refracted
or absorbed. The modeling of the light beam splitting is achieved by simulating of
many photons. The behavior of a photon arriving at the boundary of two media
(fig. 1.7) will depend on the type of the surface, an incident angle and indices of
refraction of both materials.
   The UNIFIED model of GEANT4 describes different reflection mechanisms: the
specular spike - reflection about the average surface normal, the specular lobe -




                                                                                    19
Chapter 1 Introduction




                 Figure 1.7: Different types of reflection in GEANT4 (from [13]).



reflection about the normal of the micro facet, Lambertian or diffuse reflection and
the back scattering.
   The micro facets of the rough surface are specified by σα , which is the standard
deviation of the angle between two normals: the one of the smooth surface and that
of the local, microscopic surface. Parameter σα doesn’t influence diffuse reflection.




20
Chapter 2
Simulation
2.1 Simulation setup
This section describes the geometry and the material parameters used in the
GEANT4 simulation. The simulation setup includes the detector with CeBr3 scin-
tillator crystal and SiPM at the far end of it as well as the γ photons source.




Figure 2.1: Representation of the simulated detector. The SiPM is cross-hatched, teflon reflector is shown
in black. Dimensions are given in mm. Left: with cylindrical crystal of 25.4 × 25.4 mm. Right: with
51 × 51 × 10 mm crystal of quadratic section.


  The point-like source of γ photons was placed at a distance of 0.1 mm in front
of the detector. The simulated beam of 10000 particles had predefined position,
direction and energy that ranges from 20 keV to 4 MeV.
  At the different runs of the simulation crystals of round (fig. 2.1 left) or square
section (fig. 2.1 right) with different size and thickness were used.
  The scintillator has the 3 mm teflon reflector that covers it from all sides except
the one with SiPM. The SiPM, situated at the bottom of the CeBr3 crystal is an




                                                                                                       21
Chapter 2 Simulation


ideal one, that absorbs all the optical photons achieved it. The surface between the
CeBr3 and the SiPM is left completely transparent.
   For electromagnetic interactions the Livermore package for low energy physics
with atomic relaxation sub-packages was used.
   The main CeBr3 optical properties used in the simulation are provided in the
table 2.1. The complete set of those properties are listed in the appendix (Fig A.1).
The value of light yield, decay time as well as the emission spectrum were taken
from the publication [1].
   The wavelength-dependent attenuation length for LaBr (including absorption and
scattering length) was used from the paper [6] as no data for CeBr was found.

        Number            Property                       Value                  Units
          1             Light Yield                        60              photons per keV
          2             Decay time                         18                    ns
          3           Refractive index                  1.9 [28]
          4         Emission range (max)             340-440 (370)                 nm


             Table 2.1: Main material properties of CeBr3 as a input of the simulation.


  The reflection mechanism between the CeBr3 crystal and the teflon reflector was
defined with UNIFIED model of GEANT4 [11]. The interface was set as “dielectric-
dielectric” with “groundbackpainted” or “polishedbackpainted” surface. The table
2.2 shows the 4 surface descriptions used in simulation. The option D is a configur-
ation adapted from the study [13].
  “Polishedbackpainted” as well as “groundbackpainted” optical surfaces consist of
two interfaces (fig. 2.2 left): crystal-gap and gap-wrapping. In “polishedback-
painted” optical surface the gap-wrapping interface is supposed to be perfectly
smooth, only specular spike reflection (by Snell’s law) takes place here. At the
“groundbackpainted” surface only the Lambertian reflection (cosine distributed)
takes place at the gap-wrapping interface. The parameter “reflectivity” determ-
ines the fraction of the optical photons reflected at the gap-wrapping surface. The
rest is absorbed.

                 Crystal-gap int.        σα      Gap-wrapping int.           reflectivity
            A          no                 0        Lambertian                    0.97
            B     specular spike          0        Lambertian                    0.97
            C     specular spike          0       specular spike                 0.97
            D      Lambertian            0.6       Lambertian                    0.97


           Table 2.2: The different optical interfaces of the reflector used in simulations.




22
                                                       2.2 Verification of the material properties




Figure 2.2: Left: The schematic representation of optical interfaces in“groundbackpainted” and “polished-
backpainted” surfaces. Right: Positions of gamma photons source inside of the scintillator.



2.2 Verification of the material properties
First the correlation of the simulation results with the materials properties input: the
emission spectra, the light yield distribution, absorption length for optical photons
as well as behavior of the optical photons at different surfaces was verified.

2.2.1 Scintillation spectrum




Figure 2.3: The comparison of the simulated spectral distribution of the scintillation emission (the blue line)
with the simulation input (the red dots). The spectra are normalized by their maximum value.


  To check the emission spectrum 10000 photons of 1 MeV were simulated. The
energy of each of the optical photons created as a result of scintillation was read out
and plotted in the histogram. In this simulation the cylindrical CeBr3 crystal with a




                                                                                                           23
Chapter 2 Simulation


diameter of 2.54 cm and the thickness of 2.54 cm was used and the source of gamma
photons was placed in the middle of the crystal (point A on figure 2.2 right).
  The figure 2.3 compares the simulation input (see fig. A.1 in Appendix) with the
resulting emission spectrum. The simulated spectrum has a step form, is determined
between 340 nm and 440 nm with a peak at 370 nm and coincides with the input.
This shape results while GEANT4 fills the spectrum interval between two provided
points with the constant mean value of those points.

2.2.2 Gamma photons interactions
The absorption efficiency of the scintillator depends on the linear attenuation coef-
ficient of the material µ, whereas the photopeak efficiency depends on the kind of
gamma photons interaction, that dominates at the certain energy.
   The figure 2.4 right shows the fraction of different interaction for each energy:
photoelectric effect, Compton scattering or pair production. Only the first interac-
tion of each gamma photon is counted and filled into the histogram. For CeBr3 the
photoelectric effect dominates for incoming gamma photons with the energy up to
200 keV. That means that one can suppose the photopeak efficiency to be close to
100% up to this energy (see 3.1).

                                                                                                      photoeffect         compton scattering          pair production
                                                                                           100                                                                          100
                                                       probability of given interaction




                                                                                          10 1                                                                          10 1




                                                                                          10 2                                                                          10 2



                                                                                                 20          50     100     200       500      1000   2000     4000
                                                                                                                            energy, keV


Figure 2.4: Left: The fraction of optical photons produced as a result of scintillation as a function of the
distance from its front end. Right: Gamma photons interactions dominate at different energies.


   The absorption length X0 of γ photons, which is the distance over that the intens-
ity of the beam is reduced to 1/e of initial, is not an input parameter of the GEANT4
simulation, but is determined by the chemical composition of the material. It is an
inverse of the attenuation coefficient (see eq. 1.4) and can be computed from:
                                                   1     1
                                           X0 =      = µ                                                                                                              (2.1)
                                                   µ   ρ ·ρ




24
                                           2.2 Verification of the material properties


where µρ - the mass attenuation coefficient, that for different energies can be found
in [24]. For a compound material the mass attenuation coefficient can be obtained
from:
                                  µ X          µ
                                    =      wi ( )                                (2.2)
                                  ρ      i
                                               ρi
where wi is the weight fraction of the element i in the compound material.
  One can compare the depth at which the scintillated optical photons are produced
with the absorption length of the gamma photons in CeBr3. Of cause it will not be
the same, as the γ photons from the some energy level are not absorbed completely
at the first interaction, but they almost coincide for gamma photons with the energy
up to 100keV. The figure 2.4 left shows the fraction of the optical photons scintillated
as a function of the path length.
  The histogram shows the expected exponential behavior. The calculated value of
X0 (from [24]) for 200 keV γ photons is suppose to be around 1.44 cm, the corres-
ponding simulated value is about 1.62 cm and thus show no drastically discrepancy.
  The one more reason why the scintillation depth being crucial is that the amount
of optical photons achieved the bottom of the scintillator as well as their spatial
distribution at the output side depends on the path traveled. From the histogram
on fig. 2.4 left one can suppose wider spatial distribution of the optical photons for
low energetic gamma photons.

2.2.3 Light yield distribution
In GEANT4 the light yield is defined as a number of optical photons produced per
unit energy deposition by a charged particle, that is why simulations with gamma
photons as well as electrons as incoming particles were performed and compared at
this step. For the reasons described in 1.5 the light yield for γ photons can be equal
or less than that for an electron of the same energy.
                                                                                  0   0
   In this run the particle gun was also placed in the center of the cylindrical 1 × 1
scintillator. The normalized frequency νi was calculated as:
                                            ni
                                      νi = P                                       (2.3)
                                            i ni
where ni is the number of events with the amount of optical photons in range i.
   The figure 2.5 shows the light yield distribution for electrons and gamma photons
with energy of 50 keV simulated in center of CeBr3 crystal. The simulated light
distribution is expected to be Gaussian distributed around the mean light yield
value (input parameter, 60 optical photons per keV deposited energy). The results
of the fit show the agreement with this assumption. Simulated in the center of the
crystal the gamma photons of low energy are completely absorbed and the light




                                                                                     25
Chapter 2 Simulation




Figure 2.5: The light yield distribution for 50 keV incoming electrons (left) and photons (right) with fitted
Gaussian distribution.



yield of the gamma photons nearly coincide with that of the electron of the same
energy.
   With the increase of the energy of incoming gamma photon the light yield distri-
bution comes close to the line from fig. 1.6. The histogram on fig. 2.6 left shows
the light yield distribution for 2MeV incoming gamma photon. The energy resolu-
tion that can be determined from the fig. 2.6 right is about 1.3%, which is better
than 4.3% measured in [1], as the simulation do not includes the signal reduction by
SiPM.




Figure 2.6: Left: the light yield distribution of the 2MeV gamma photon. Right: The photopeak range of
the light yield distribution from figure left with FWHM (black line).


   The light distribution of the gamma photons lower energy simulated outside of
the scintillator (fig. 2.7) also shows the difference from those simulated in the center
of the crystal. As the low energetic gamma photons are absorbed very close to the



26
                                                      2.2 Verification of the material properties


rand of the crystal the X-ray photons emitted while de-excitation can escaped the
scintillator, and thus reducing the total light yield of the given gamma photons.
Gamma photons of 100 keV are absorbed deep enough preventing the escape.




Figure 2.7: The light yield distribution for gamma photons of 20keV (left), 50keV(center) and 100keV (right).




2.2.4 Optical photons bulk absorption
The optical photons undergo bulk absorption in a material determined by the para-
meter called absorption length, which is the mean distance traveled by an optical
photon before being absorbed [11]. The figure 2.8 shows the accumulated number
of optical photons absorbed up to the distance. It has exponential character and is
reduced to 1/e of the initial value after the distance equal to the absorption length
for given energy.




Figure 2.8: Accumulated fraction of absorbed optical photons with E=3.35eV in CeBr3 crystal as a function
of distance. The red line show the length, at which the beam is reduced to 1/e.




2.2.5 Reflection at different surfaces
In the next simulation run the reflection at different types of surfaces described in
2.1 were examined. The beam of 1000 optical photons was simulated inside of the
CeBr3 crystal and shot towards the surfaces between the CeBr3 crystal and the
reflector at different incidence angels to the surface normal.



                                                                                                          27
Chapter 2 Simulation




                       0                                                    0




                      A                                                     A




                       B                                                    B




                       C                                                    C
      Figure 2.9: The behavior of the beam of the optical photons at different kinds of surfaces.




28
                                                        2.2 Verification of the material properties


   The figure 2.9 shows the outcomes of these simulations: at the left side the events
with incidence angle less than the angle of total reflection are represented, at the
right side - those with incidence angle greater than the angle of total reflection.
   The fig. 2.9.0 represents the bare CeBr3 crystal. In both cases the beam remains
thin: all the photons are refracted, if the incidence angle is less than that of total
reflection and all photons undergo total internal reflection, if the incidence angle is
greater than the critical angle.




Figure 2.10: Different interactions of optical photons in bare CeBr3 crystal. Dark red shows the optical
photons that achieve direct the output side of the scintillator, the green part is reflected on the side surface.
The gray color shows optical photons that escape through the side surface and the dark blue - those absorbed
inside the scintillator.


   The figure 2.10 shows the fraction of the optical photons undergo different inter-
action in such a crystal. The part of the optical photons reaches the output side
direct after scintillation increases with the energy, as the gamma photons interact
deeper in the CeBr3 . The fraction of the optical photons reaches the output side
after all interaction increases with the energy lightly.
   The fig. 2.9.A shows the behavior of the photons at the “groundbackpainted”
surface without a gap. As supposed regardless of the incident angle the beam is
diffuse reflected. In that case some amount of optical photons are absorbed at the
interface gap-wrapping (light blue color on fig. 2.11). The total amount of optical
photons achieve the output side of scintillator is greater than that of the bare crystal
and is independent on the energy of the incoming gamma photons.
   The surfaces on the fig. 2.9.B and .C represent the surfaces with two interfaces
with a gap between them. The beam coming at the angle greater than the critical one
results in a specular spike reflected at the first interface, but at the second interface
the “groundbackpainted” causes the Lambertian reflection and the “polishedback-



                                                                                                             29
Chapter 2 Simulation




Figure 2.11: Different interactions of optical photons in a CeBr3 crystal with reflector A (left) and B (right).



painted” in case .C shows the specular spike reflection again. The reflection at the
first interface allows the part of the optical photons to achieve the second interface,
reducing the number of optical photons absorbed at the gap-wrapping surface (com-
pare fig. 2.11 left with 2.11 right and 2.12), but the specular spike reflection reduces
the total number of optical photons reached the output side of the scintillator.
   In the case of reflector D diffuse reflection occurs at both interfaces, the total
number of the optical photons at the output side in this case is maximal.




Figure 2.12: Different interactions of optical photons in a CeBr3 crystal with reflector C (left) and D (right).




30
Chapter 3
Results
3.1 Detection efficiency and photopeak efficiency
The absorption efficiency and photo-peak efficiency of the CeBr3 crystal for gamma
photons of different energy were computed from the simulation with 10000 gamma
photons from the source in front of the scintillators of different shapes and sizes.
The absorption efficiency was calculated as:
                                             nc
                                      AE =                                        (3.1)
                                             ns
with ns - the number of gamma photons simulated and nc - the number of simulated
photons for which at least one optical photon was counted.
  The photo-peak efficiency or peak-to-total ratio was calculated as:
                                             nph
                                     PE =                                         (3.2)
                                             nc
with nph - the number of photons, those light yield was in the photopeak.

3.1.1 Detection efficiency of bare CeBr3 crystal
The absorption efficiency of the cylindrical 1’ x 1’ CeBr3 crystal (fig. 3.1) is equal
to 100% up to 100keV and decreases drastically with the energy as the absorption
length X0 grows with the energy of the gamma photon. The increase in the thickness
of the scintillator for the same energies leads to the increase of the path traveled by
a photon inside of the crystal and detection efficiency as well.
   The increase in the surface of CeBr3 crystal in turn (70 x 70 mm against 51 x 51
mm) doesn’t affect the absorption efficiency for the perpendicular incidence.
   The photopeak efficiency of the CeBr3 is maximal in the range of 100-500 keV. The
escape of X-ray while de-ecxitaion of the atoms causes the decrease of the photopeak
efficiency for gamma photons with energy lower than 100 keV. The gamma photons
of higher energy interact largely via Compton scattering or pair production and are
not always completely absorbed in a crystal, which leads to the reduction of the
photopeak efficiency at such energies.



                                                                                    31
Chapter 3 Results



                                         100                                                            100
                                          90                                                             80
                                          80                                                             60




                                                                             Photo-peak efficiency, %
              Absorption efficiency, %
                                          70                                                             40
                                                                                                         30
                                          60
                                                                                                         20
                                          50

                                                    1" x 1"                                                        1" x 1"
                                          40        2" x 2"                                              10        2" x 2"
                                                    3" x 3"                                                        3" x 3"
                                               20   50 100 200 500 1000   4000                                20   50 100 200 500 1000   4000
                                                          energy, keV                                                    energy, keV

Figure 3.1: Absorption efficiency (left) and photo-peak efficiency (right) for cylindrical CeBr3 crystal of
different size. The size on the legend are in inches: diameter x thickness.



  The more thick crystal allows the scattered gamma photons to interact one more
time (or several times) and raises the probability for such a photon to be completely
absorbed reducing the energy dispersion. As the Compton scattering has a wide
angular distribution the photopeak efficiency for gamma photons with energy higher
than 1 MeV increases slightly with the grows of the area from 51x51 mm (fig. 3.2)
to 70x70 mm (fig. 3.3).


                                         100                                                            100
                                                                                                         80
                                          80
                                                                                                         60
                                                                             Photo-peak efficiency, %
              Absorption efficiency, %




                                          60                                                             40
                                          50                                                             30
                                          40
                                                                                                         20
                                          30
                                                    5.1 x 5.1 x 1 cm                                               5.1 x 5.1 x 1 cm
                                                    5.1 x 5.1 x 2 cm                                     10        5.1 x 5.1 x 2 cm
                                          20        5.1 x 5.1 x 2.54 cm                                            5.1 x 5.1 x 2.54 cm
                                                    5.1 x 5.1 x 3 cm                                               5.1 x 5.1 x 3 cm
                                               20   50 100 200 500 1000   4000                                20   50 100 200 500 1000   4000
                                                          energy, keV                                                    energy, keV

Figure 3.2: Absorption efficiency (left) and photo-peak efficiency (right) for quadratic 5.1 x 5.1 cm CeBr3
crystal of different thickness. The size on the legend are in cm.


  Compared with the other scintillators CeBr3 has a prominent absorption as well
as a photo-peak efficiency (fig. 3.4).




32
                                                                           3.1 Detection efficiency and photopeak efficiency



                                          100                                                               100
                                                                                                             80
                                           80
                                                                                                             60




                                                                                 Photo-peak efficiency, %
               Absorption efficiency, %


                                           60
                                                                                                             40
                                           50
                                                                                                             30
                                           40
                                                                                                             20
                                           30
                                                     7.0 x 7.0 x 1 cm                                                  7.0 x 7.0 x 1 cm
                                                     7.0 x 7.0 x 2 cm                                        10        7.0 x 7.0 x 2 cm
                                           20        7.0 x 7.0 x 2.54 cm                                               7.0 x 7.0 x 2.54 cm
                                                     7.0 x 7.0 x 3 cm                                                  7.0 x 7.0 x 3 cm
                                                20   50 100 200 500 1000      4000                                20   50 100 200 500 1000   4000
                                                           energy, keV                                                       energy, keV

Figure 3.3: Absorption efficiency (left) and photo-peak efficiency (right) for quadratic 7.0 x 7.0 cm CeBr3
crystal of different thickness. The size on the legend are in cm.




Figure 3.4: The absorption efficiency (left) and photo-peak efficiency (right) for different cylindrical 1’ x 1’
scintillators including CeBr3 (adapted from [4]).



3.1.2 Effect of the encapsulation of the crystal and the direction of the
      incoming gamma photons
The figure 3.5 left shows the absorption efficiency for 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3
scintillator for different incidental angles to the normal. As the inclined trajectory
elongates the path, that a gamma photon can travel inside the scintillator, the
detection efficiency increases with the angle. The photo-peak efficiency shows no
dependence on the incidental angle of the incoming gamma photon.
   In the setup with the reflector around the scintillator the source of the photons
was moved and placed in front of the reflector. For both 10 and 20 mm thick
scintillators there is a small gain of efficiency for the most energetic gamma photons
due to elongation of the path that photons pass through the crystal. On the other
hand the gamma photons of lower energy can already be absorbed inside of the
front reflector and never reach the scintillator, reducing the absorption efficiency



                                                                                                                                                    33
Chapter 3 Results




Figure 3.5: Absorption (left) and photo-peak (right) efficiency for quadratic 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 crystal
for different incidental angles.



for gamma photons with energy lower than 100 keV. However the presence of the
reflector does not change the photo-peak efficiency noticeably.


                                    100                                                                              100
                                                                                                                      80
                                     80
                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                      50
                                     60                                                                               40
                                                                                             Photo-peak efficiency
            Absorption efficiency




                                     50                                                                               30
                                     40
                                                                                                                      20
                                     30

                                               51 x 51 x 10, without reflector                                        10        51 x 51 x 10, without reflector
                                     20        51 x 51 x 10, reflector A                                                        51 x 51 x 10, reflector A
                                               51 x 51 x 20, without reflector                                                  51 x 51 x 20, without reflector
                                               51 x 51 x 20, reflector A                                                        51 x 51 x 20, reflector A
                                          20       50     100    200       500 1000   4000                                 20       50     100    200       500 1000   4000
                                                                 energy, keV                                                                      energy, keV


Figure 3.6: Absorption (left) and photo-peak (right) efficiency for quadratic 51 x 51 x 10 and 51 x 51 x 20
mm CeBr3 crystal with and without reflector. The size on the legend are in mm.




3.2 Light distribution at the bottom of the scintillator
3.2.1 Light distribution at the bottom of the bare crystal
The small depth of gamma photons interaction causes the wide spreading of the
optical photons at the output side of the scintillator for 20-100 keV gamma photons.
The figure 3.7 left shows the X-axis distribution of the optical photons at the bottom
of the 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 crystal. The gamma photons of higher energy
interact deeper, producing sharp illumination in the center of the crystal, allowing
reconstruction of the interaction position. This effect is even enhanced in the case
of the 2 cm thick scintillator (fig. 3.7 right), as the optical photons has to pass



34
                                                                                    3.2 Light distribution at the bottom of the scintillator


through more material. In this case the gamma photons with energy less than 100
keV produce homogeneous illumination on the output side of the scintillator.
                                                          51 x 51 x 10 mm                                                                                     51 x 51 x 20 mm
                                            0.010
                                                                                 20 - 100 keV
                                                                                 200, 500 keV
                                                                                 1000 -4000 keV                                             0.006
                                            0.008




                                                                                                      Frequency distribution along x-axis
      Frequency distribution along x-axis




                                                                                                                                            0.005

                                            0.006                                                                                           0.004

                                                                                                                                            0.003
                                            0.004

                                                                                                                                            0.002
                                            0.002
                                                                                                                                            0.001        20 - 100 keV           1000 keV
                                                                                                                                                         200 keV                500 - 4000 keV
                                            0.000                                                                                           0.000
                                                    20   10        0        10        20                                                            20       10            0        10           20
                                                                x, mm                                                                                                   x, mm


Figure 3.7: The X-axis distribution of the optical photons at the output side of the scintillator for 51 x 51 x
10 mm (left) and 51 x 51 x 20 mm (right) CeBr3 crystal.


   At the same time the height of the peak for high energy gamma photons diminishes
as more of them can interact at a lower depth (see fig. 2.4). So the peak of the 200
keV gamma photons decreases significantly as more than 90% of all gamma photons
of this energy are absorbed within the 2 cm layer of CeBr3 .




Figure 3.8: The fractions of optical photons undergo different interaction in a quadratic 51 x 51 x 10 mm
(left) and 51 x 51 x 20 mm (right) CeBr3 crystal for different energies of incoming gamma photons. The
gray color shows, how much optical photons escape the scintillator through the lateral side. The dark rose
share is those optical photons, that achieve the output side direct after the scintillation, while the light rose
- those after one or more internal reflections. The dark blue line shows the fraction of the optical photons
absorbed in the crystal direct after the scintillation, while the light blue one - those after one or more internal
reflections.


   The energy of the incoming gamma photons and the depth of interaction respect-
ively does not have a large impact on the fraction of the optical photons absorbed



                                                                                                                                                                                                      35
Chapter 3 Results


inside of the 1 or 2 cm thick CeBr3 crystal, as the absorption length for optical
photons in CeBr3 is in the range of 10-15 cm (fig. A.1) or on the part of the optical
photons escaped through the lateral surface in the absence of the reflector. The
thickness of the scintillator does influence both values (fig. 3.8).
  The figures A.2 - A.5 show the spatial distribution of the optical photons density
(per 1 gamma photon per cm2 ) at the output side of the bare CeBr3 crystal. The
number of photons achieve the bottom of the scintillator increases proportional to
the energy of the incoming gamma photons and decreases with the thickness of the
crystal.




Figure 3.9: The total number of the optical photons (per a gamma photon) at the output side of scintillator
for the 51 x 51 x 10 mm and 51 x 51 x 20 mm bare CeBr3 crystal.


   The fig. 3.9 shows the total number of optical photons achieved the bottom of
the scintillator. For lower energy gamma photons more optical photons are seen
for a thin crystal, but from 200 keV the thicker scintillator will have the brighter
illumination of the output side.

3.2.2 Effect of the the direction of the incoming gamma photons


                                                                              20 - 50 keV
                                Frequency distribution along x-axis




                                                                      0.005   100 keV
                                                                              200 keV
                                                                      0.004   500 - 4000 keV

                                                                      0.003

                                                                      0.002

                                                                      0.001

                                                                      0.000
                                                                              20     10       0    10   20
                                                                                           x, mm

Figure 3.10: The X-axis distribution of the optical photons at the output side of the scintillator for 51 x 51
x 10 mm CeBr3 crystal for different incident angles.




36
                                                                                   3.2 Light distribution at the bottom of the scintillator


  The incident angle of the incoming gamma photons has no effect on the spatial
distribution at very low energies, but starting from 100 keV the profile ceases being
symmetric any more (see fig. 3.10 and A.10).

3.2.3 Effect of the reflector
The addition of the reflector smooths the peak of the profile for high energy gamma
photons and raises it for gamma photons of low energy (fig. 3.11). The larger area
of the output side causes the spreading the optical photons at the corners (fig. 3.12),
but does not affect drastically the distribution in the center.
                                                         51 x 51 x 10 mm

                                                                                                                                          0.005                     20-50 keV


                                                                                                    Frequency distribution along x-axis
                                                                            20 - 100 keV
                                                                            200, 4000 keV
                                                                                                                                                                    200
                                           0.008
                                                                            500, 1000, 2000 keV                                                                     500 - 4000 keV
                                           0.007                                                                                          0.004
     Frequency distribution along x-axis




                                           0.006
                                                                                                                                          0.003
                                           0.005

                                           0.004
                                                                                                                                          0.002
                                           0.003

                                           0.002                                                                                          0.001
                                           0.001
                                                                                                                                          0.000
                                           0.000                                                                                                  20   10      0    10     20
                                                   20   10        0
                                                               x, mm
                                                                           10        20                                                                     x, mm

Figure 3.11: The X-axis distribution of the optical photons at the output side of the scintillator for 51 x 51
x 10 mm (left) and 51 x 51 x 20 mm (right) CeBr3 crystal with reflector A.




Figure 3.12: The X-axis distribution of the optical photons at the output side of the scintillator for 70 x 70
x 10 mm (left) and 70 x 70 x 20 mm (right) CeBr3 crystal with reflector A.


  The usage of the reflector results in that the fraction of the optical photons at
the output side is not influenced by the energy of the gamma photon any more (fig.
3.13), but the right choice of the reflector can increase this fraction.




                                                                                                                                                                                     37
Chapter 3 Results


  The figures A.6 - A.9 show the spatial distribution of the optical photons density
at the output side of the CeBr3 crystals with reflector A. The number of photons
achieve the bottom of the scintillator increases proportional to the energy of the
incoming gamma photons and decreases with the thickness of the crystal again.
The figures A.11 compared the spatial distribution for scintillator with reflectors A
and D: those look the same.




Figure 3.13: The fractions of optical photons undergo different interaction in a quadratic 51 x 51 x 10 mm
CeBr3 crystal with different kinds of reflector for different energies of incoming gamma photons. The gray
color shows, how much optical photons escape the scintillator through the lateral side. The dark rose share
is those optical photons, that achieve the output side direct after the scintillation, while the light rose -
those after one or more internal reflections. The dark blue line shows the fraction of the optical photons
absorbed in the crystal direct after the scintillation, while the light blue one - those after one or more internal
reflections.




38
                                     3.2 Light distribution at the bottom of the scintillator


   The fig. 3.14 compares the total number of optical photons achieved the output
side of the scintillator for different sizes with and without reflector. The usage of
the reflector (A in this case) increases the illumination of the output side of the
scintillator for both 1 and 2 cm thick crystals at all energies. In contrast to the
case of bare CeBr3 where the thicker crystal has the brighter illumination of the
output side for gamma photons of more than 200 keV, in case of the crystal with
reflector the 1 cm CeBr3 provides brighter (or the same) illumination at the bottom
of scintillator independent on energy of the gamma photon.




Figure 3.14: The total number of the optical photons (per a gamma photon) at the output side of scintillator
for the 51 x 51 x 10 mm and 51 x 51 x 20 mm CeBr3 crystal with and without reflector.


   The table 3.1 gives the evaluated spatial resolution for gamma photons of some
energy in CeBr3 crystal of different sizes with and without reflector. Compared to
[26] the position resolution for gamma photons of middle energy (500 keV in simu-
lation and 356 keV in [26]) gives comparable outcome. For the position resolution
at lower energy (<100 keV in simulation and 81 keV in [26]) the simulation shows
worse values.

   Crystal size, mm         FWHM (< 100keV)              FWHM (500keV)             FWHM (1MeV)
     51 x 51 x 10               20 mm                        4 mm                    3.2 mm
     51 x 51 x 20                  -                        4.8 mm                   3.6 mm
    51 x 51 x 10 R             14.8 mm                       6 mm                    4.2 mm
    51 x 51 x 20 R              28 mm                       8.4 mm                   7.2 mm


Table 3.1: The position resolution in x-direction (FWHM) for different CeBr3 crystal for gamma photons of
lower than 100 keV, 500 keV and 1 MeV.




                                                                                                         39
Chapter 4
Conclusions and perspectives
The developed GEANT4 simulation includes evaluation of the absorption and pho-
topeak efficiency of the CeBr3 crystal as well as the tracking of the scintillated
optical photons inside of the crystal. The simulated experimental setup provides
several models of reflection on the CeBr3 crystal surfaces.
   The simulation confirms that CeBr3 scintillator has a very good absorption ef-
ficiency comparable with that of Ge detector for gamma photons in a range from
20 keV to 4 MeV as well as photopeak efficiency inferior only to BGO detector.
Both figures grow predicatively with the thickness of the crystal, but are almost
independent on the surface area. Only for gamma photons with energy exceeding 2
MeV the increase in area leads to the gain of the photopeak efficiency.
   The energy resolution obtained from the simulation is much better compared with
the measurement from [1]. That means, that a more precise simulation setup with
detailed description of the crystal encapsulation, as well as optical interface at the
bottom of the scintillator and SiPM is required.
   The fraction of the optical photons, arriving at the output side of the scintillator
almost do not depend on the energy of the incoming gamma photons and the usage
of reflector completely hides it away. The gain in the number of optical photons
achieving the bottom of the CeBr3 crystal due to reflector application reaches about
20% and the right choice of the reflecting model can affect the output illumina-
tion within 5-8%. The model with diffuse Lambertian reflection on both interfaces
reflection turns to be the most effective.
   The spatial distribution of the illumination of the output side depends on the
energy of the incoming gamma photon: at low energies up to 100 keV the distribution
is a Gaussian-like, flattening with the thickness of the scintillator. The gamma
photons of higher energy give the peak-shaped distribution of the illumination at
the bottom of the scintillator.
   The estimated localization resolution of the CeBr3 crystal turned out to be lower
than that measured in [26], where the CeBr3 of the smaller surface was studied.
In current simulation the self-absorption and re-emission of the optical photons in
CeBr3 crystal were not implemented. Taking those processes in account can change




40
the spatial distribution of the illumination of the output side, as the re-emission
occur isotropically [1].




                                                                                41
     Appendices




42
Appendix A




44
Figure A.1: The complete list of material properties of CeBr3 as an input for the simulation.




                                                                                                45
Appendix A


                  20 keV gamma photons
                                                                           20 gamma photons
                                              100000
                                              50000       0.0035
        20
                                              20000       0.0030
                                              10000
        10                                    5000        0.0025
                                              2000        0.0020
         0                                    1000
                                              500         0.0015
        10                                    200
                                                          0.0010
                                              100
                                              50          0.0005
        20                                    20
                                              10          0.0000
                                                                    20    10      0       10   20
             20    10     0     10       20

                  50 keV gamma photons
                                                                           50 gamma photons
                                              100000
                                              50000       0.0035
        20
                                              20000       0.0030
                                              10000
        10                                    5000        0.0025
                                              2000        0.0020
         0                                    1000
                                              500         0.0015
        10                                    200
                                                          0.0010
                                              100
                                              50          0.0005
        20                                    20
                                              10          0.0000
                                                                    20    10      0       10   20
             20    10     0     10       20

                  100 keV gamma photons
                                                                          100 gamma photons
                                              100000
                                                          0.0040
        20                                    50000
                                              20000       0.0035
                                              10000       0.0030
        10                                    5000
                                                          0.0025
                                              2000
         0                                    1000        0.0020
                                              500
                                                          0.0015
        10                                    200
                                              100         0.0010
                                              50          0.0005
        20                                    20
                                              10          0.0000
                                                                    20    10      0       10   20
             20    10     0     10       20

                  200 keV gamma photons
                                                                          200 gamma photons
                                              100000
                                              50000        0.008
        20
                                              20000        0.007
                                              10000
        10                                                 0.006
                                              5000
                                              2000         0.005
         0                                    1000         0.004
                                              500
                                                           0.003
        10                                    200
                                              100          0.002
                                              50           0.001
        20                                    20
                                              10           0.000
                                                                    20    10      0       10   20
             20    10     0     10       20


Figure A.2: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 scintillator per gamma photon of 20 - 200 keV.




46
                  500 keV gamma photons
                                                                          500 gamma photons
                                            100000
        20                                  50000
                                                           0.007
                                            20000
                                            10000          0.006
        10                                  5000           0.005
                                            2000
         0                                  1000           0.004
                                            500            0.003
        10                                  200
                                            100            0.002
                                            50             0.001
        20                                  20
                                            10             0.000
                                                                    20    10      0       10   20
             20     10    0     10     20

                  1000 keV gamma photons
                                            100000
        20                                  50000
                                            20000
                                            10000
        10                                  5000
                                            2000
         0                                  1000
                                            500
        10                                  200
                                            100
                                            50
        20                                  20
                                            10
             20     10    0     10     20

                  2000 keV gamma photons
                                                                          2000 gamma photons
                                            100000         0.010
        20                                  50000
                                            20000          0.008
                                            10000
        10                                  5000
                                                           0.006
                                            2000
         0                                  1000
                                            500            0.004
        10                                  200
                                            100            0.002
                                            50
        20                                  20
                                            10             0.000
                                                                    20    10      0       10   20
             20     10    0     10     20

                  4000 keV gamma photons
                                                                          4000 gamma photons
                                            100000
        20                                  50000
                                            20000          0.008
                                            10000
        10                                  5000
                                                           0.006
                                            2000
         0                                  1000
                                            500            0.004

        10                                  200
                                            100            0.002
                                            50
        20                                  20
                                            10             0.000
                                                                    20    10      0       10   20
             20     10    0     10     20


Figure A.3: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 scintillator per gamma photon of 500 keV - 4 MeV.



                                                                                                        47
Appendix A


                                              20 keV gamma photons

              20                                     50000    0.0200
                                                     20000    0.0175
                                                     10000
              10                                     5000     0.0150
                                                     2000     0.0125
              0                                      1000
                                                              0.0100
                                                              0.0075
              10
                                                     100      0.0050
              20                                              0.0025
                                                     10       0.0000
                   20   10    0    10   20                             20   10   0   10   20
                                              50 keV gamma photons

              20                                     50000    0.0200
                                                     20000    0.0175
                                                     10000
              10                                     5000     0.0150
                                                     2000     0.0125
              0                                      1000
                                                              0.0100
                                                              0.0075
              10
                                                     100      0.0050
              20                                              0.0025
                                                     10       0.0000
                   20   10    0    10   20                             20   10   0   10   20
                                              100 keV gamma photons

              20                                      50000
                                                            0.020
                                                      20000
                                                      10000
              10                                      5000 0.015
                                                      2000
               0                                      1000
                                                            0.010
              10
                                                      100     0.005
              20
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              200 keV gamma photons
                                                      50000   0.035
              20
                                                      20000   0.030
                                                      10000
              10                                      5000    0.025
                                                      2000    0.020
               0                                      1000
                                                              0.015
              10                                              0.010
                                                      100

              20                                              0.005

                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20

Figure A.4: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 20 mm CeBr3 scintillator per gamma photon of 20 - 200 keV.




48
                                              500 keV gamma photons
                                                             0.05
               20                                      50000
                                                       20000 0.04
                                                       10000
               10                                      5000
                                                       2000 0.03
               0                                       1000
                                                             0.02
               10
                                                       100
                                                             0.01
               20
                                                       10    0.00
                    20   10    0    10   20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              1000 keV gamma photons

              20                                       50000
                                                       20000 0.05
                                                       10000
              10                                       5000 0.04
                                                       2000
               0                                       1000 0.03

                                                             0.02
              10
                                                       100
                                                             0.01
              20
                                                       10    0.00
                    20   10   0     10   20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              2000 keV gamma photons
                                                             0.06
              20                                       50000
                                                       20000 0.05
                                                       10000
              10                                       5000 0.04
                                                       2000
               0                                       1000 0.03

              10                                             0.02
                                                       100
                                                             0.01
              20
                                                       10    0.00
                    20   10    0    10   20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              4000 keV gamma photons

              20                                       50000
                                                       20000 0.05
                                                       10000
              10                                       5000 0.04
                                                       2000
               0                                       1000 0.03

              10                                             0.02
                                                       100
                                                             0.01
              20
                                                       10    0.00
                    20   10   0     10   20                            20   10   0   10   20

Figure A.5: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 20 mm CeBr3 scintillator per gamma photon of 500 keV - 4 MeV.




                                                                                                        49
Appendix A


                                              20 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000
              20
                                                              0.004
              10                                      1000
                                                              0.003
               0
                                                              0.002
              10                                      100
                                                              0.001
              20
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                           20   10   0   10   20
                                              50 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000
              20
                                                              0.004

              10                                      1000
                                                              0.003
               0
                                                              0.002
              10                                      100
                                                              0.001
              20
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                           20   10   0   10   20
                                              100 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000
              20
                                                              0.004
              10                                      1000
                                                              0.003
               0
                                                              0.002
              10                                      100
                                                              0.001
              20
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                           20   10   0   10   20
                                              200 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000
              20                                              0.007
                                                              0.006
              10                                      1000    0.005
               0                                              0.004
                                                              0.003
              10                                      100
                                                              0.002

              20                                              0.001
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                           20   10   0   10   20

Figure A.6: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 scintillator with reflector A per gamma photon of 20 - 200 keV.




50
                                              500 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000
              20                                              0.008
                                                              0.007
              10                                      1000    0.006
                                                              0.005
               0
                                                              0.004
                                                      100     0.003
              10
                                                              0.002
              20                                              0.001
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              1000 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000
              20                                              0.008
                                                              0.007
              10                                      1000    0.006
                                                              0.005
               0
                                                              0.004

              10                                      100     0.003
                                                              0.002
              20                                              0.001
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              2000 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000
              20                                              0.008
                                                              0.007
              10                                      1000    0.006
                                                              0.005
               0
                                                              0.004

              10                                      100     0.003
                                                              0.002
              20                                              0.001
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              4000 keV gamma photons
                                                      10000 0.008
              20
                                                              0.007
                                                              0.006
              10                                      1000
                                                              0.005
               0                                              0.004

                                                      100     0.003
              10
                                                              0.002
              20                                              0.001
                                                      10      0.000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20

Figure A.7: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 scintillator with reflector A per gamma photon of 500 keV - 4 MeV.




                                                                                                        51
Appendix A


                                              20 keV gamma photons
                                                     100000
                                                     50000
              20
                                                     20000    0.0025
                                                     10000
              10                                     5000     0.0020
                                                     2000
               0                                     1000     0.0015
                                                     500
                                                     200      0.0010
              10
                                                     100
                                                     50       0.0005
              20
                                                     20
                                                     10       0.0000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              50 keV gamma photons
                                                     100000
                                                     50000
              20
                                                              0.0025
                                                     20000
                                                     10000
              10                                     5000     0.0020

                                                     2000
               0                                     1000     0.0015
                                                     500
                                                     200      0.0010
              10
                                                     100
                                                     50       0.0005
              20
                                                     20
                                                     10       0.0000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              100 keV gamma photons
                                                     100000
                                                     50000
              20
                                                              0.0025
                                                     20000
                                                     10000
              10                                     5000     0.0020

                                                     2000
               0                                     1000     0.0015
                                                     500
                                                     200      0.0010
              10
                                                     100
                                                     50       0.0005
              20
                                                     20
                                                     10       0.0000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              200 keV gamma photons
                                                     100000
                                                     50000
              20                                              0.0035
                                                     20000
                                                     10000    0.0030
              10                                     5000
                                                              0.0025
                                                     2000
               0                                     1000     0.0020
                                                     500
                                                              0.0015
              10                                     200
                                                     100      0.0010
                                                     50
              20                                              0.0005
                                                     20
                                                     10       0.0000
                   20    10   0    10    20                            20   10   0   10   20


Figure A.8: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 20 mm CeBr3 scintillator with reflector A per gamma photon of 20 - 200 keV.




52
                                              500 keV gamma photons
                                                      100000   0.005
                                                      50000
              20
                                                      20000
                                                               0.004
                                                      10000
              10                                      5000
                                                      2000     0.003
               0                                      1000
                                                      500
                                                               0.002
              10                                      200
                                                      100
                                                      50       0.001
              20
                                                      20
                                                      10       0.000
                   20    10   0     10   20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              1000 keV gamma photons
                                                      100000
                                                      50000
              20
                                                               0.005
                                                      20000
                                                      10000
              10                                      5000     0.004

                                                      2000
               0                                      1000     0.003
                                                      500
                                                      200      0.002
              10
                                                      100
                                                      50       0.001
              20
                                                      20
                                                      10       0.000
                   20    10   0     10   20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              2000 keV gamma photons
                                                      100000
                                                      50000
              20
                                                               0.005
                                                      20000
                                                      10000
              10                                      5000     0.004

                                                      2000
               0                                      1000     0.003
                                                      500
                                                      200      0.002
              10
                                                      100
                                                      50       0.001
              20
                                                      20
                                                      10       0.000
                   20    10   0     10   20                            20   10   0   10   20
                                              4000 keV gamma photons
                                                      100000
                                                      50000    0.005
              20
                                                      20000
                                                      10000    0.004
              10                                      5000
                                                      2000     0.003
               0                                      1000
                                                      500
                                                               0.002
              10                                      200
                                                      100
                                                      50       0.001
              20
                                                      20
                                                      10       0.000
                   20    10   0     10   20                            20   10   0   10   20


Figure A.9: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 20 mm CeBr3 scintillator with reflector A per gamma photon of 500 keV - 4 MeV.




                                                                                                        53
Appendix A

                                           20 keV gamma photons
                                                 100000
           20                                    50000     0.0035
                                                 20000     0.0030
                                                 10000
           10                                    5000      0.0025
                                                 2000      0.0020
            0                                    1000
                                                 500       0.0015
           10                                    200
                                                 100       0.0010
                                                 50        0.0005
           20                                    20
                                                 10        0.0000
                 20        0          20                             20    10     0     10    20
                                           200 keV gamma photons
                                                  100000
           20                                     50000    0.004
                                                  20000
                                                  10000
           10                                     5000     0.003
                                                  2000
            0                                     1000     0.002
                                                  500
           10                                     200
                                                  100      0.001
                                                  50
           20                                     20
                                                  10       0.000
                 20         0         20                            20     10    0     10     20
                                        1000 keV gamma photons
                                                  100000
           20                                     50000    0.006
                                                  20000
                                                  10000    0.005
           10                                     5000
                                                  2000     0.004
            0                                     1000     0.003
                                                  500
           10                                     200      0.002
                                                  100
                                                  50       0.001
           20                                     20
                                                  10       0.000
                 20         0         20                            20     10    0     10     20
                                        4000 keV gamma photons
                                                  100000
           20                                     50000
                                                  20000    0.005
                                                  10000
           10                                     5000     0.004
                                                  2000
            0                                     1000     0.003
                                                  500
           10                                     200      0.002
                                                  100
                                                  50       0.001
           20                                     20
                                                  10       0.000
                 20         0         20                            20     10    0     10     20
Figure A.10: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 scintillator if gamma photons are shot at 50◦ to the normal (per gamma
photon of 20 keV, 200 keV, 1MeV and 4 MeV).


54
Figure A.11: The spatial distribution of the density (per cm2 ) of the optical photons arrived at the output
side of the 51 x 51 x 10 mm CeBr3 scintillator with reflector A (left) and D (right) (per gamma photon of
20 keV, 100 keV, 1MeV and 4 MeV).




                                                                                                         55
References
[1]   F.G.A.Quarati et al. Scintillation and detection characteristics of high-
      sensitivity CeBr3 gamma-ray spectrometers. In: Nuclear Instruments and
      Methods in Physics Research A (2013).
[2]   J.Greiner et al. Considerations for a spectrometer for POLAR-2.
[3]   P. Bloser et al. Advanced Scintillators and Readout Devices for High-Energy
      Astronomy. 2010.
[4]   Peter F. Bloser et al. The Advanced Scintillator Compton Telescope (ASCOT)
      balloon project. In: Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2016: Ultraviolet to
      Gamma Ray. Ed. by Jan-Willem A. den Herder, Tadayuki Takahashi and
      Marshall Bautz. 2016, pp. 1919–1925. doi: 10.1117/12.2233230.
[5]   Thomas Carlson. Photoelectron and Auger Spectroscopy. Springer US, 1975.
      doi: 10.1007/978-1-4757-0118-0.
[6]   Herman Dam et al. Optical Absorption Length, Scattering Length, and Refract-
      ive Index of LaBr3:Ce3+. In: IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science - IEEE
      TRANS NUCL SCI 59 (June 2012), pp. 656–664. doi: 10.1109/TNS.2012.
      2193597.
[7]   Roland Diehl. Gamma-ray line measurements from supernova explosions. In:
      Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union 12.S331 (Feb. 2017),
      pp. 157–163. issn: 1743-9221. doi: 10.1017/s1743921317004343.
[8]   Erik Dietz-laursonn. Detailed Studies of Light Transport in Optical Compon-
      ents of Particle Detectors. PhD thesis. Aug. 2016.
[9]   Winicjusz Drozdowski et al. CeBr Scintillator Development for Possible Use
      in Space Missions. In: Nuclear Science, IEEE Transactions on 55 (July 2008),
      pp. 1391–1396. doi: 10.1109/TNS.2007.908579.
[10] Efficiency Calculations for Selected Scintillators. url: https : / / www .
     crystals.saint-gobain.com/sites/imdf.crystals.com/files/documents/efficiency-
     calculations.pdf.
[11] Geant4 Book For Application Developers. url: http://geant4-userdoc.web.
     cern.ch/geant4-userdoc/UsersGuides/ForApplicationDeveloper/html/index.
     html.




                                                                                 57
[12] Geant4 Physics Reference Manual. url: http : / / cern . ch/ geant4 -
     userdoc/UsersGuides/PhysicsReferenceManual/fo/PhysicsReferenceManual.
     pdf.
[13]   Aleksandar Gostojic et al. Characterization of LaBr3:Ce and CeBr3 calori-
       meter modules for 3D imaging in gamma-ray astronomy. In: Nuclear Instru-
       ments and Methods in Physics Research Section A Accelerators Spectromet-
       ers Detectors and Associated Equipment 832 (Oct. 2016), pp. 24–42. doi:
       10.1016/j.nima.2016.06.044.
[14]   Claus Grupen and Irene Buvat, eds. Handbook of particle detection and ima-
       ging, vol. 1 and vol.2. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012. doi: 10.1007/978-
       3-642-13271-1.
[15]   M. Kole et al. The POLAR gamma-ray burst polarization catalog. In: As-
       tronomy & Astrophysics 644 (Dec. 2020), A124. issn: 1432-0746. doi: 10 .
       1051/0004-6361/202037915.
[16]   Merlin Kole. POLAR-2: The First Large Scale Gamma-ray Polarimeter. In:
       PoS ICRC2019 (2020), p. 572. doi: 10.22323/1.358.0572.
[17]   Claude Leroy and Pier-Giorgio Rancoita. Principles of Radiation Interac-
       tion in Matter and Detection. 3rd. WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 2011. doi: 10 .
       1142/8200.
[18]   Klaus Lüders and Robert O. Pohl. Pohl’s Introduction to Physics. 1st ed.
       Springer International Publishing, p. 634. isbn: 978-3-319-50269-4.
[19]   Katherine Mesick et al. Elpasolite Planetary Ice and Composition Spectrometer
       (EPICS): A Low-Resource Combined Gamma-Ray and Neutron Spectrometer
       for Planetary Science. Jan. 2019.
[20] Photon interaction with matter (in russian). url: http://nuclphys.sinp.
     msu.ru/ihem/ihem03.htm.
[21] Radiation Detection Materials. url: https://www.hellma.com/de/kristalline-
     materialien/kristalle-zur-strahlungsdetektion/.
[22]   Pawel Sibczynski et al. Characterization of some modern scintillators recom-
       mended for use on large fusion facilities in g-ray spectroscopy and tomographic
       measurements of g-emission profiles. In: Nukleonika 62 (Jan. 2017), p. 223. doi:
       10.1515/nuka-2017-0032.
[23]   R.W. Sloof. Luminescence Properties of NaI:Tl and CeBr3 with New Co-
       dopants. Sept. 2016.
[24] Tables of X-ray mass attenuation coefficients on the web-site of NIST. url:
     https://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/XrayMassCoef/tab3.html.




58
[25]   Klaus Tadday. Scintillation Light Detection and Application of Silicon Pho-
       tomultipliers in Imaging Calorimetry and Positron Emission Tomography. Jan.
       2011.
[26]   Alexei Ulyanov et al. Localisation of gamma-ray interaction points in thick
       monolithic CeBr3 and LaBr3:Ce scintillators. In: Nuclear Instruments and
       Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors
       and Associated Equipment 844 (Nov. 2016). doi: 10.1016/j.nima.2016.11.
       025.
[27] Web-page about Compton scattering on Wikipedia. url: https : / / en .
     wikipedia.org/wiki/Compton_scattering.
[28] Web-page of SCIONIX. url: https : / / scionix . nl/ scintillation -
     crystals/#tab-id-4.
[29] Web-page of the BepiColombo mission. url: https : //www . cosmos . esa .
     int/web/bepicolombo/mgns.
[30] XCOM database. url: https://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/Xcom/xcom3_2.




                                                                                 59
